+++
title = "Why I use C for Flight Software"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["C"]
+++
This post is about why I use C for any serious project at work, and why I would
choose to use C again even if starting from stratch on a new project.  I am
hoping to cover where this choice comes from and what advantages and
disadvantages it has, specifically for the sort of work that I do. Its not
intended to be a rant or to put down other languages or processes- I just want
this blog to provide some insight into my experiences with what flight software 
is like at NASA Langley Research Center.


This choice is certainly not motivated by something as simple as performance-
its the result of the particular tradeoffs that apply to flight software.
All engineering choices have tradeoffs, and have to be understood in
terms of the costs that apply to a particular situation.  The most important
things for flight software, in my experience, are: simplicity, maintanability,
consistency, testability, and reviewability. These may not be surprising, but
the decisions that they motivate can be very different from the decisions I see
in other software.


Language choice is a very important- you inherit your ecosystem, tools, and the
mentality and capabilities of your language as your framework for expressing
yourself, and its important to think carefully about language when starting a
project.  There is some tendency to obsess about languages, but if you are
going to be using a tool for years on a large project, it does merit some
thought.


I see places in this post where my thinking may be formed by my choice of
tools, where my estimate of costs and benefits are from the perspective of the
tools and practices that I have already chosen to use. I've certainly used
other languages at work- Haskell, Ruby, Python, Perl, R, MatLab- and outside of
work- C#, Lua, Rust, Java, and more. However, my serious development has all be
in C/C++ and I can't help but see things in the light of my tools. 


Most of these topics deserve posts of their own, but I wanted
to at least get the ideas down first. It could also use more examples, but
its become too long and just needs to be posted.


## The Domain
The particular domain I am talking about here is embedded systems
work for the flight software systems I have worked on at NASA. These are not
the resource contrained systems that some embedded software inhabits- I haven't
done microcontrollers for this work, I've only done processor boards with
hundreds of megabytes of RAM and flash, and processors in the hundreds of
megahertz range. They are fairly powerful for what they are- you need to be
aware of resources, and careful about timing and latency, but they don't have
the mentality of scarcity that you see in some systems.


In this domain, you interact with a number of other systems through some
hardware interface, you accept commands, produce telemetry, and run one or more
complex algorithm. Your code may never be in its "production" environment until
it is actually in space (or whereever it goes), and if your code fails it can
be catastrophic to the project. You don't have easy access to your production
systems, and updating code- even for the simpliest change- could take monthes
of development, review, testing, and operations time. In a sense, you need
to get things right the first time, and your code needs to operate continually,
perhaps for years at a time.


## The Options
Its easy to rule out huge groups of languages- nothing with a
garbage collector is deterministic enough, languages with a virtual machine
don't supports all the processors and operating systems we use, and dynamic typing
is just not an option when correctness is important.


In a way, the only options for flight software systems are C and C++. There are
examples of other language like Python being used in cubesat projects, or
assembly for some things. Certainly Ada is used in these domains, but I've
never personally come across one of these systems.


The only contender that I see entering this space is Rust. All other
alternatives I've seen never mature enough to be used in serious work, and Rust
is not there yet. I'm hoping that one day it will prove itself, and become a
contender in new projects, but we are not there yet.


Simplicity
===
In flight software, simplicity is vital. C is a relatively small
language, and I prefer to only use a subset of the language.  This means I use
as few syntactic forms as possible, and enforce consistency in as many aspects
of the code as possible. C could certainly be simplier, but it is at least 
possible to write very explicit C with enough displine. There are certainly
dark corners of C, but compared to any other language I know, it has to be
considered very simple.


Simplicity is required here because every language construct and every new
construct interacts with every other one. Each thing that is allowed in the
codebase introduces difficultly in reviewing and maintaining code- it is better
to be safe and rely on only a small group of concepts then to risk some
interaction causing a subtle failure. More abstract code can be smaller, which
does aid review and maintanence, but for many of the problem we solve, C is at
about the right level of abstraction, and we prefer explicit code to smaller,
more indirect code.


## Least Power
This is a case where additional power is often not helpful- its
a principal of least power sort of situation. Most of the problems we solve are
fairly straightforward- they do not usually require complex algorithms or data
structures. For these situations, the cost of abstraction is very apparent. The
systems are already complex- you have to be very careful where you add mental
overhead through abstraction.


## Consistency and Discipline
I think the consistency, simplicity, and
determinism here would be considered draconian in other programming domains- we
don't allocate memory after startup, we almost never free memory, we check the
result of every function, we check every pointer for NULL, and we revalidate
all inputs in every function, even if they are validated in calling functions.
We declare all variables at the top of a function, we don't use single letter
variables even in loops, we don't call functions in 'if' statements, we use
consistent naming of all functions, variables, and globals. These practices are
enforced to keep the code deterministic, to add in reviewing codebases, to
ensure that errors are caught and do not propagate. Its very pessimistic
programming, and each line of code that accomplish a task is followed by at
least 5 lines of error handling, often more.


## C++ 
This is a place where I see a real danger in C++. When I have
used C++ I have restricted myself to a very small subset of the language, not
using templates, inheritance, operator overloading, lambdas- we use it as an
expanded C. The advantages you get are not bad- function overloading, default
parameters, and access to a larger standard library do help. The cost that I
see in this is that consistency becomes a much more difficult battle to fight.
Its like you are standing on a precipice and you have to step carefully to
avoid falling into a pit of complixity. It becomes a battle to keep things
simple and choose which concepts to introduce, and it can become very easy to
make mistakes. This is not an unjustified fear- I found a case within a complex
algorithm where data was allocated at runtime, which is forbidden in our
systems. It was not obvious that this was happening- the language left us open
to an implicit allocation that we were not used to seeing or reviewing for.


Review
===
Flight software must all be reviewed, and code should be as transparent to the
reviewers as possible. I don't like to see new concepts introduced unless they
are really providing some benefit- the reviewers cognative overhead should be
as small as you can make it. Reviewers have to catch a lot of possible mistakes
in C- it is very easy to corrupt memory in particular- so discipline is required
to avoid memsets, memcpys, and other functions which can cause corruption. Data
structures and algorithm are kept as simple as possible.


This might seem like a case against C, but I find that it is very easy in other
languages to introduce new concepts, and very hard to ensure that they do not
lead to problems. In C++, as soon as I start to see a bunch of classes, my heart
sinks because I know I'm going to have to jump through hoops to ensure that the code
is correct. We almost never use inheritance for this reason- I don't want choices
of what function is called to be determined by the runtime properties of code.


In a sense, the advantage to C here is its lack of means of abstraction- the
way to build complex systems is through procedures. Lacking other mechanisms,
you always know how some feature will be built- structs, unions, enums,
\#defines, and functions.  When you review the code, you will not be learning
some tower of abstraction, or looking through files trying to find where
something is implemented, or testing your ability to remember some complex
dispatch mechanism. Its just procedures and data all the way down.


The main place where you might not be able to follow the code precisely is when
function pointers are used. We do use function pointers, but only in certain modules,
and only in fairly simple ways.


Note that we don't use complex macros, which can lead to some very complex constructions.


Tooling
===
Part of tooling for me is LabWindows, VxWorks, CFE/CFS, and a
flight software architecture used at Langley.  It happens that I am in an
environment that makes a great deal of use of C, so naturally it is more
confortable to keep it that way. VxWorks is one example where C++ fits,
but for the others, C is the native language.


Some advantages here include being able to port code between an embedded system
and a LabWindows tool, and making it easier to support compiling an subset of
the embedded code on a desktop. Certainly this can be done in C++, but I've
always found it simplier to do with C then C++.


Another part of tooling is that the C language is simplier then C++, and easier
to integrate with FFIs such as Lua or Python, and just simplier overall.  This is an
example of the downstream costs of complexity that effect every tool and
concept involved in your code.


Nearly all FFIs seem to be for C, and support for C++ is partial and far more
complex. Parsing C++ is hugely complex, its name mangling is a pain, and its
size makes it unmanageble when a high degree of control is required.


Disadvantages
===

## Safety
If I could express at least some of my code in a safer language, use
more modern programming concepts, and have more algorithms and structures
available, I would be more productive. There are many places where its easy to
get bitten by the C/C++ scalpel, or to find that we can't be sure of
correctness of a section of code without a great deal of work. We handle this
with stringent practices, review, unit testing, and system testing, but I would
prefer to not have to worry about some of the problems that lurk in most C/C++
code.


Something like [ivory](https://ivorylang.org/ivory-introduction.html), Rust, or
one of the other safer but still low level languages might be doable one day,
and I would love to incorporate it into a smaller project and see if it helps.


However, we have to be pessimistic in our evaluation and only use languages and
code that we trust in this domain. No research or untested code can be used in
the large projects- we have to make the best decision as engineers who are
following a process. We can't afford costly bugs or code that we don't
understand fully, and we already have so much infrastructure and so many
practices built around the C/C++ paradigm that its very hard to make any other
choice. We have to estimate cost and schedule, and use operating systems,
drivers, and board support packages written in C/C++. This is where Rust's
ability to be integrated into and to talk to other code could be its critical
feature to find its way into high assurance code.


Level of Abstraction
===
For some tasks, the level of abstraction in C is about
right- moving data around, interacting with hardware, and doing simple tasks.
Certainly I wish it were better with things like endianness and bitfields, but
we work around its shortcomings. However, sometimes its limitations do
become confining rather then freeing and I wish for a different level
of abstraction.


I see places where using the same language for everything means that it is
almost never at exactly the right level of abstraction. The language
[tower](heeps://ivorylang.org/tower-overview.html) is a good example of where
system architecture could be domain specific language, leaving implementation
details to another language.


In some code, I would love to have a separate language, or subset of a language,
where additional checking could be done, or which does not have ways of expressing
unsafe code. This is another principal of least power situation- I would like
the option to use less power when appropriate, but in C you have full power all the
time.


The other place I see this is in complex algorithm The lack of abstraction and
built-in tools can make this code more complex then necessary, and it is a
place where translating from another language does make sense. This is done in
some systems- I've heard of Simulink used this way- but even with this strategy
you face issues with trusting the algorithm code.  You have to make some
decisions on how to review it, test it, and ensure maintain it  as part of the
rest of the system.


C++ certainly has a lot of power, and I could see it being a step in the right
direction in some cases. My main relunctance for these algorithms would be
wanting to avoid introducing too many new concepts- each new concept and its
interaction with other concepts in the code adds complexity and overhead into a
largely manual review and testing process. I could see some of this being
aleviated by better tooling that could replace manual components, but I still
think adheritance to simplicity is an important thing to hold on to.


## Type Safety
C is not a type safe language. There are certain things it will
catch, but in many cases the correct use of types is up to the programmer.  It
is not dynamic, but we can cast pointers freely, and the language does not help
us avoid issues with memory use. We can cast incorrectly, index off of arrays,
and overwrite memory almost anywhere.


One argument for C++ would be the ability to express more in its type system,
and the ability to more clearly express and check casts.  I'm not well versed
in this style, so it is hard for me to evaluate how this relates to my work.
There may be an intermediate where some safety can be gained with very little
complexity that would improve overall code quality.


## Discipline
Some of the advantges to developing in C come from strict discipline in development,
rather then something provided by the language. I would love to have a language
that would aleviate the manual work we do in reviews to make sure we do things
safely and catch error cases. Again, in principal C++ can help with this, but
I haven't been willing to accept the cost of increased complexity that it brings.


Conclusion
===
Look back, this post has as much about disadvantages as it has about advantages.
I think what this tells me is that we live in a messy and imperfect world, where
the tool that provides the best results comes with a host of disadvantages that we
live with. If there were a language without the edge cases, the portability issues,
and with simplier syntax and fewer choices, which caught more mistakes in safety
and memory usage, I would use it, but it does not exist.


I wonder if using Ada could result in safer and better code, or some subset of
C++ chosen for flight software. Or maybe Rust will take over everything. I
don't know, but for now, when I'm writing code that has to be correct, I
use C.
